Ok, you do not have to assume that basic income is introduced gradually. If we forget about inflation, at least at first, then we are just comparing two states - one with and one without the basic income. You can think about dynamics later.
The other thing is to think in real terms. So, everybody gets a transfer of money, i.e. like a negative tax, to cover what? Consumption? Or also social security (health, education, retirement, disability, dignity)? If the latter, then they pay taxes and contributions. If not, then they do not. Start with the former assumption (which means that social security is financed from taxes that are paid on earned income).
So, what happens if everybody gets an amount of money each months that should cover some basic consumption (e.g. the one which will e.g. sustain a person's capabilities rather than improve them or cripple them; everything else covered by either earned income or by social security). If this is an average individual, then perhaps an average consumption basket will do.
How do we pay for it? Taxes on income and on wealth. Let us say that there is a VAT, a progressive income tax (e.g. 20 percent and 50 percent, this can be calibrated). And a wealth tax e.g. capital gains tax. The latter should not, in principle, affect behaviour, because it does not affect income (presumably). Some of the income tax should also not affect behaviour, because it is unlikely that somebody earning milions will stop doing what he or she is doing if their income is cut in half (though they might want to hide their income, which is a concern, but not at this stage).
So, up to this point, we just redistribute money. Total consumption, assume, stays the same (it might not) and total production stays the same.
The question is why should anybody work? Well, perhaps to pay for social security. In addition, to buy a house, or to consume more or of different quality so as to improve his or hers welfare and expected duration of life.
Assume, now, that these transfers increase spending. That should support more production, which would support higher wages for those who work. So, assume that the increase is 10 or 20 percent (that is a level change), then with no change in the distribution between profits and wages, they both increase that much (profits plus wages = national income or GDP). Budget revenues also (tax revenues = constant share of national income). So, presumably, inequality between the basic income and earned income increases. Assuming that profits are invested, GDP growth ate the rate of profits.
We put foreign trade and other open economy issues aside.
Will the inequality be enough to induce work, investment in capabilities, and savings? One problem that basic income solves is the transparency of capabilities and income. With unemployment benefits and other transfers, the problem is that people may have an incentive to hide either their abilities or their income. With guaranteed basic income, revealed preference to work is the true preference to work (or study or invest). But while the inequality between wages and profits may decrease, that between wages and basic income may have to increase, on the assumption that there are diminishing returns to consumption. One basic welfare is guaranteed, work becomes dearer (e.g. in terms of foregone leisure).
So, assume that basic income at the level of basic consumption is transferred to everybody (including children); assume some increase in consumption and thus production (e.g. if everybody unemployed now is actually employed with average productivity, how much would that be/). Assume constant budget revenue to GDP share. Tax wages and profits plus capital gains to finance revenues. Take share of profits to be somewhere where it is now, or a bit lower. The rests are wages. Assume budget expenditures to cover social security and public investment (possibly by 2 or percentage points higher than now).
See what happens.
